The Project Gutenberg eBook, Report of the Cromer Ladies' Bible
Association, 1838, by Cromer Ladies' Bible Association


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Report of the Cromer Ladies' Bible Association, 1838


Author: Cromer Ladies' Bible Association



Release Date: October 16, 2018  [eBook #58112]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF THE CROMER LADIES' BIBLE
ASSOCIATION, 1838***


Transcribed from the 1839 Josiah Fletcher edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                   [Picture: Public domain book cover]





                                  REPORT
                                  OF THE
                                  CROMER
                        LADIES’ BIBLE ASSOCIATION,


                              MDCCCXXXVIII.

                                * * * * *

                                 NORWICH:
               PRINTED BY JOSIAH FLETCHER, UPPER HAYMARKET.
                                  1839.

                                * * * * *




STATEMENT
UPON
THE ELEVENTH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE
Cromer Ladies’ Bible Association,
1838.


                                * * * * *




PRESIDENTS.


               THE HONORABLE MRS. UPCHER, AND MRS. BUXTON.




VICE-PRESIDENT.


                               MISS BUXTON.




TREASURER.


                              MISS JOHNSON.




SECRETARIES.


                MISS EARLE, MRS. B. RUST, MRS. J. W. RUST.




COMMITTEE.

MRS. UPCHER       MISS PEELE
MISS BUXTON       MISS PANK
MISS JOHNSON      MISS SANDFORD
MISS FIELD        MISS RICHARDSON
MISS FULLER       MRS. SIDLE

Cash Secretary’s Statement.

                          _£_    _s._    _d._        _£_    _s._       _d._
Amount received                                       42      15          9
this year, FREE
Ditto BIBLES                                          15       5         0½
                                                      58       0         9½
Amount received                                      507       2          8
since the
establishment,
FREE
Ditto BIBLES                                         407      13         2½
                                                     914      15        10½
Amount paid since         896      10      3½
the establishment
for Bibles,
Testaments, &
Grants
Incidental                 18       5       7
expenses
                                                     914      15        10½
Grant to Norwich                                      37       8         4½
Auxiliary Bible
Society, 1838

Bible Secretary’s Statement.

                                   BIBLES        TESTAMENTS      TOTAL
Received this year                     62                24         86
Distributed this year                  73                29        102
Received since the                   1465              1072       2537
establishment,
Distributed ditto                    1418              1032       2450
Remaining on hand                      47                40         87

Received free since the establishment.

                  _£_    _s._     _d._
1828               45       9        3
1829               45      10        9
1830               47       5        8
1831               45      13        3
1832               43      12        0
1833               49       7        1
1834               51      10        8
1835               51      19        2
1836               36       6        8
1837               46       0        4
1838               42      15        9
                  505      10        7
Interest            1      12        1
                  507       2        8
                  914      15      19½

Received for Bibles and Tests. since the establishment.

              _£_    _s._     _d._
1828           52      17        9
1829           43      16        9
1830           39       5       4½
1831           44      13       7½
1832           39       2       11
1833           52      11        0
1834           40       0        3
1835           35       6        6
1836           23       2        1
1837           21      11       11
1838           15       5       0½
              407      13       2½
              507       2        8
              914      15      10½

Paid for Bibles & Testaments.

                   _£_    _s._     _d._
1828                75       8        8
1829                56       1        6
1830                59       4        6
1831                59       7        4
1832                51      10        3
1833                69      19        5
1834                48      14        3
1835                47       1        9
1836                32      18        5
1837                31      17       10
1838                19      11        5
                   551      15        4
Grants             344      14      11½
Inc. Exp.           18       5        7
                   914      15      10½

Grants.

                _£_    _s._     _d._
1828–9           40       0        0
1830             35       0        0
1831             29      13        2
1832             29      18        0
1833             30      10        7
1834             41      13        2
1835             38      14       10
1836             25      10        8
1837             36       6        2
1838             37       8       4½
                344      14      11½

Annual Subscribers.

                        _£_    _s._    _d._
LADY SOPHIA WINDHAM       1       1       0
MRS. GURNEY,              1      10       0
_Grove_
MRS. BARING               1       1       0
MRS. MORRIS               1       1       0
MRS. PAUL                 1       1       0
MRS. FOX                  1       1       0

DISTRICTS.

1.  _Aylmerton & Felbrigg_.
                           _£_    _s._    _d._
Mrs. Fuller                          4       0
Mrs. Knights                         4       0
Mr. Daniel                           4       0
Smaller subscriptions                6       0
2.  _Alby & Aldboro’_.
Mr. Springall                       12       0
Rev. Mr. Shuckburgh                  6       0
Mrs. Clarke                          6       0
Mrs. Hacon                           6       0
Mr. Press                            6       0
Miss Press                           6       0
3.  _Beeston_.
Smaller subscriptions                2       0
4.  _Baconsthorpe & Bodham_.
Miss Mayes                           6       0
Miss S. Mayes                        6       0
Mrs. Bumfry                          3       0
Mrs. Beales                          6       0
5.  _Beckham_.
Cook Flower, Esq.                   12       0
Mr. Fuller                           6       0
Mr. Sayers                           6       0
6.  _Cromer_.
Miss Earle                           6       0
Mr. Betts                            6       0
7.  _Cromer_.
Mrs. Sharpe                          6       0
Mrs. Goodwin                        12       0
Mrs. Bunnett                        12       0
Miss Press                           6       0
Miss Pank, _Lodge_                   6       0
8.  _Cromer_.
Mrs. J. Rust                         6       0
Mrs. B. Rust                         6       0
Mrs. Hogg                            6       0
Mrs. Sidle                           6       0
9.  _Cromer_.
Miss Peele                           6       0
Miss Field                           6       0
10.  _Cromer_.
Mr. F. Pank                          6       0
Mr. E. Heath                        12       0
11.  _Gimingham & Trimingham_.
12.  _Hanworth_.
Miss Mayow                           6       0
Miss U. Mayow                        6       0
Mr. Press                            6       0
Mrs. Press                           6       0
Mr. Amis                             6       0
13.  _North Repps_.
Miss Gurney                         12       0
Miss Buxton                         12       0
Miss Richardson                      6       0
14.  _North Repps Hall_.
T. P. Buxton Esq.           £1      10       0
Mrs. Buxton                 £1      10       0
A. Johnston, Esq.                   12       0
Mrs. Johnston                       12       0
Mr. T. F. Buxton                    12       0
Mr. C. Buxton                       12       0
Miss Buxton                         12       0
Mrs. Cook                            6       0
Mrs. Hyde                            4       0
M. Kealey                            4       0
E. Rix                               4       0
M. Holmes                            4       0
S. Bourne                            4       0
15.  _Overstrand and Sydestrand Village
Association_.
Miss Gurney                 £2       2       0
Miss Buxton                 £2      10       0
Mrs. Cubitt                          6       0
Miss Carr                            6       0
Mrs. Cross                           6       0
M. J. Cross                          6       0
Miss Emery                           6       0
Mrs. Moore                           4       0
Mrs. Field                           4       0
Miss Field                           4       0
Miss M. Field                        4       0
Mr. R. Curtis                        6       0
Mr. J. Curtis                        4       0
H. Roper                             4       0
L. Rushmore                          4       0
E. Goodwin                           4       0
E. Greenaker                         4       0
S. A. Nichols                        4       0
John Spinks                          4       0
Stephen Rogers                       4       0
John Howes                           6       0
Smaller subsns.             £2      10       0
16.  _Roughton_.
17.  _Runton_.
H. J. Johnson, Esq.                 12       0
Miss Johnson                         6       0
Miss E. Johnson                      6       0
Mr. I. Pank                          6       0
Mrs. Yearham                         3       0
Mrs. Bumfry                          3       0
Mr. Wright                           3       0
Miss Wright                          3       0
Mrs. Baker                           3       0
Mrs. Covell                          3       0
Miss Carr                            3       0
Miss Ellis                           3       0
Smaller subscriptions                7       0
18.  _South Repps_.
Mrs. Weeds                           6       0
19.  _Saxthorpe & Corpusty_.
Mr. Kelly                            4       0
Mr. Goldsmith                        4       0
20.  _Sheringham_.
The Hon. Mrs. Upcher                12       0
H. Upcher, Esq.                     12       0
Mrs. Upcher                         12       0
Mrs. E. C. Buxton                   12       0
Arthur Upcher, Esq.                 12       0
Mr. Overton                         12       0
Mr. Long                             6       0
Rowland                              4       0
21.  _Stody_.
Alice Pigott                         6       0
Mrs. Ladle                           6       0
Mr. Paul                             4       0
Smaller subscriptions               11       0
22.  _Weybourne_.
T. F. Buxton, Esq.                  12       0
S. Hoare, Esq.                      12       0
The Hon. Mrs. Upcher                 6       0
Mrs. Copling                         6       0
Mr. Arms                             6       0
Stephen Eades                        6       0
Mr. Pigott                           6       0




REPORT.


WE, the committee of the Ladies’ Bible Association for Cromer and its
neighbourhood, consider it our duty to lay before our subscribers, the
prefixed statement of the condition of our charge; and in doing so, we
think it may be expedient to accompany the same with some extracts from
the slight records which we have kept of our proceedings, since Nov.
1827, when our friend, Mr. J. J. Gurney, now on a christian mission in
America, first called us together.

We may premise that in our note of the first year, (1828,) we find the
need of the society indicated by the fact, that in one outlying district,
a poor woman had lately given three shillings for the tattered remains of
a bible.  The announcement of the formation of our association, and of
the facility which it afforded for obtaining bibles, was received with
pleasure throughout the neighbourhood.  Many parents were desirous to
avail themselves of the opportunity of providing bibles for their
children, and even some solitary old couples who could not read
themselves subscribed, that they might have a bible in the house for
their neighbours to read to them.

The young people were generally found eager to subscribe.  All the girls
(but one) of one school gave their names as soon as the plan was proposed
to them, and several having supplied themselves with bibles, continue as
free subscribers, and take much interest in reading the monthly extracts.
It was pleasant too, to see the desire of children in various places, to
devise a way to earn their own subscriptions.  One little girl, who had a
hen, set aside the first chickens for the payment of hers, and an errand
boy volunteered to run some additional miles, to obtain a few pence for
his.

Some interesting particulars of the effect of passages of the word of God
upon individuals, have occasionally been related in conversation with the
collectors.  On one of these applying to a young man, the latter said,
that though he had a bible, he would willingly subscribe five shillings
for another, (as a gift we suppose, to some friend,) and he proceeded to
say, that when very young he was very thoughtless, and, for a length of
time, had feared neither God nor man.  Being alone one day in his
father’s house, he saw a bible lying on a window seat; he opened it in a
careless manner, and his eye was caught by a verse of awful denunciation
against sinners.  He could not bear it, and flung the bible into a corner
of the room, and went out.  The words still haunted him, and, on his
return after some time, seeing the bible still on the floor, he picked it
up, and opening it again, observed a passage containing, as he said, “a
promise, a blessed invitation.”  His attention was happily attracted, he
read on, and from that time, formed a habit of reading the scriptures,
which has proved, as he thankfully acknowledged, a blessing to his soul.

We may now mention an instance of the utility of reading the bible freely
and undauntedly to others.  A gentleman, who had been in the practice of
reading in the cottages, went into one for this purpose on the evening of
a fair held in the neighbourhood.  He found the old woman on whom he had
called gone to bed, but five or six rough-looking men were sitting round
the fire, and hesitatingly he asked, if they would let him read a chapter
to them.  They, with at least equal hesitation, assented, and our friend
asked for a bible.  They brought him first a Latin testament, but at last
a large bible was brought from another cottage, and he read to them the
26th chapter of St. Matthew’s gospel, and spoke to them on the
injunctions there given.  They all became attentive.  One of the men who
had been a smuggler, and much addicted to drinking, and who would
probably have finished his evening by intoxication at the fair, appeared
particularly struck by what he then heard.  On his going home, his wife
was astonished at his altered demeanor, but dared not speak to him; his
daughter, however, asked him, “what he had been doing?”  On which, he
answered her in his uncouth way, that he had “been praying and would pray
again, for so the gentleman had told him from the book.”  The man
entirely changed his habits from this time.  The following harvest he was
seen by the same gentleman, coming out of a farm house with a party of
fellow-labourers, and his kind friend spoke to him, fearing he had as
formerly indulged himself.  The poor man replied, “I have been doing,
sir, what I never in my life did before, I have refused a pint of beer,
for I did not want it;” and his companions confirmed his words.  His
resolution was put to a severer test the next summer, for being lame he
was set to keep the birds from a field directly opposite one of the new
public-houses.  “Was it not a temptation to you?” said the same
gentleman.  “A sad temptation, sir, and very hard it is; but I have
resisted and kept out.”  The poor man’s conduct to his family was equally
improved; and we have perhaps the more pleasure in giving this little
history, as it happened that the bible, which was rendered the instrument
of convincing this poor man of the error of his ways, was furnished by
our association.

We must here acknowledge that it in the spirit with which subscriptions
are offered, and the prayers with which they are accompanied, which give
value to the little collections, and we trust that the prevailing motive
in most of the givers, is the honest desire to spread the knowledge of
that gospel which they have themselves learnt to prize.  It is however
pleasant, when such a desire is expressed.  Thus on one of our districts
being lately revisited with a view more especially to the promotion of
free subscriptions, a fisherman came forward with his twopence a month,
saying.  “May a blessing go with it; and perhaps even that, may be the
means of saving one soul.”  A poor woman too, on giving her offering,
said to the collectors, “If I have to work ever so hard, I will have the
penny ready when you come again; for I will pay it for the sake of the
cause.”

One more instance of the same kind, we cannot refrain from giving as
related by a beloved and lamented young member of our committee, who
laboured diligently during her brief career, to lead others to the
knowledge of those promises of the Redeemer, of which we may thankfully
believe she has experienced the blessed fulfilment.

    “December 13th, 1833.  We called on a poor woman to-day, who wished
    to subscribe for a bible for her son.  After she had told us the
    size, she said, ‘I am afraid of being troublesome, but might I give a
    trifle to the Bible Society?’  God, she said, had done so much for
    her, and she felt such a great desire to do something for his glory;
    then she thought what a poor, miserable, sinful creature she was,
    could she be permitted to do anything in his service?  What to do she
    could not guess!  Then she thought she would set to work, and what
    she could spare of her earnings, she would give with all her heart to
    the Bible Society, if I would be so kind as to receive it.  She made
    many more acknowledgments of God’s mercy, particularly that of
    opening her mind, to understand the word of God, which though she had
    read, it was without profit to herself, till lately, and when people
    used to speak to her of the benefit of reading it, she hardly
    believed them, but now she found it was her greatest comfort; when
    she opened her bible, she seemed directed to the particular passage
    that suited her case; and when she went to a place of worship,
    whatever the minister said, seemed meant for her.  She could not
    express all she felt for these mercies, but still to be silent, she
    knew would be wrong.  It was settled that she should pay one penny a
    week, and when she gave me her first penny, she said, ‘May God’s
    blessing go with my mite, that it may be useful.’”—A. U.

One of our committee gives the following account of a poor old deaf
widow, well known for twenty years past, as a consistent earnest
christian:—

    “She is thankful to have been enabled to read and understand her
    bible.—It was for some time a sealed book to her; she read it as a
    duty, but did not feel its power; she was convinced something was
    wrong in herself, and one evening, after having suffered much
    unhappiness at not being able to enjoy her bible as some did, she
    locked her cottage door, closed her shutter, spread her bible on her
    little table, and with tears, in earnest prayer, begged that God
    would show her her error, and the way of true happiness.  She chanced
    to have opened her bible at the 16th of St. John, and her eye caught
    the verse, ‘Hitherto hast thou asked nothing in my name, ask and thou
    shalt receive, that thy joy may be full.’  This verse powerfully
    impressed her mind with the mistake she had been guilty of.  She
    pleaded ever after the intercession of her Mediator, and has
    constantly enjoyed that peace and comfort his blessed word so fully
    promises.”

The same lady writes:—

    “The simplicity of a little child may not be uninteresting to those
    who wish to trace the use of the bible, in its effects upon the
    poor.—A boy of eight years old, seeing his old grand-mother
    overwhelmed with grief at a severe loss of property, which she was
    quite unequal to retrieve, went up and kissing her, said, ‘Pray don’t
    grieve, God will be sure to take care of you.—The bible tells us, he
    is a friend to the widow, and that must be true.’  The poor woman was
    so struck by the earnestness of the child, that she made up her mind
    not to grieve, but to trust in God, and she is now happy and cheerful
    again.”

She adds of another person who had lingered many years in acute
suffering, and whose departure was at length drawing near:—

    “Poor Mrs. W. continues to evince most strikingly the power of the
    bible to give comfort and support in the greatest need.  She said to
    me,—‘What would have become of me, had I been born in a heathen land,
    without a bible to rest upon?’”

A gentleman, who was looking after some crews that had been wrecked in
the storm of Sept. 1st, 1833, went into a room at the public house where
they were staying, and found one young man alone, with a book before him.
He observed it was a bible, issued by our British and Foreign Society,
and asked him if he was reading it.  The young man said, “Yes, he did not
know that he could read a better book, for it was worth the saving.”  He
then said, he had bought it “because it was so cheap, only three
shillings, and a very fine book!”  Our friend remarked to him, that he
“must know such bibles could not be built for that price, but that it was
afforded by means of a subscription.”  This he said he knew, and then
observed, that sailors were now reading their bibles at his port,
Shields, more than they used to do.  The gentleman said, he hoped that
they were not hypocrites.  “No,” the sailor said, “he thought not; he
believed the prayer meetings and bible readings at the time of the
cholera, had had a real effect upon numbers of them.”

We would earnestly recommend our associates not to lose the
opportunities, which their proximity to a dangerous coast too frequently
affords, of applying the word of God to the comfort of the ship-wrecked
mariner, and of fixing religious impressions which may have arisen in
hours of peril.  We possess a small depôt of Dutch and French testaments,
for the use of foreigners under such circumstances, and have occasionally
found them acceptable.  Our local position also calls for our unremitting
efforts to enlighten our fishermen, whose lives are so often in jeopardy.
The precariousness of their situation is an argument to which persons of
this class will be found peculiarly accessible, when pressed to acquaint
themselves betimes with the way of salvation.  Fishermen, too, have many
spare hours, while waiting for the tide, or detained by bad weather, on
shore or in harbour: we remember the pleasure with which a fisherman, who
had lately learnt to read, spoke to us of the delight he enjoyed in
spelling out a chapter of the testament, in the cuddy of his herring
boat, during many dreary winter evenings that he was moored in Boston
Bay.

For the sake of suggesting profitable topics of discourse, and of
obtaining from time to time correct information respecting the progress
of our work, and the moral condition of our districts, a set of queries
for our collectors was drawn up soon after the beginning of our
association, and it is from the answers to these, that most of our facts
are gathered.  Some advantage is gained by keeping notes of our visits,
the state of a family is the better remembered, and appropriate remarks
may be made.  Thus in one house, which was without a bible, the woman on
being asked if she would subscribe, answered, she would consider about
it.  The visitor turned to her book and said, “Mrs. L. you gave me that
very answer when I called before, and that is four years ago to-morrow;
time flies.”  She was so struck that she immediately paid a penny towards
a half-crown testament, evidently frightened at her own procrastination.

Many of our stories bear on the desirableness of a diligent and frequent
revision of our work.  We give an extract from the notes of one of our
committee, in 1833:—

    “Having been somewhat struck with the example of the ladies of
    Wisbeach, recorded in the extracts for last October, of recanvassing
    their districts once in three years, I thought it might be well to
    visit a neighbouring village for this purpose.  I did this, with the
    cordial concurrence of the collector, who though diligent and
    persevering is incapacitated by circumstances and health from extra
    exertions.  We visited every house in the place, with scarcely an
    exception, and found 23 persons willing to pay for bibles and
    testaments.  The place has had a constant, though small supply, but
    there would be a much larger demand, were it not for the lamentable
    want of education.  Perhaps the discovery of such a state of things
    may prove in some instances one of the indirect benefits of bible
    visiting.  The effects of the bibles and testaments already
    distributed, were in some instances happily observable.  Many were
    shown me which had been purchased from the society, and some appeared
    to have been used and valued as we should wish.  One elderly and very
    poor woman showed me her bible, and said, ‘eighteen years ago I
    learnt to read in it.’  I asked how she had learnt at so advanced an
    age, being now nearly sixty: she replied, ‘I went down on my knees
    and asked God Almighty to teach me, and he did.’  I said I did not
    doubt that this was the best way, but I asked her what means had been
    used?  She told me that she had heard a sermon preached on a text in
    St. John, which so strongly impressed her mind, that she felt an
    earnest desire to read it again.  Having found the place, she spent
    nearly the whole night trying to spell the words, and returned to the
    employment the next day, till her son came in, and on his expressing
    surprise at her attempting to read, she said, ‘Then why should not
    _you_ teach me? so he taught me whenever he came in from work, and
    now I can read a chapter any where in the bible.’  In this case, if
    the Bible Society did not excite the desire, it was ready to furnish
    the means of gratifying it, to the great and lasting blessing
    apparently of the individual in question.

    “Another very old woman spoke in such terms of her testament, as to
    make me feel most thankful she had ever had it.  She reads it
    constantly, to her old infirm husband, and says, ‘I know it is all I
    have to attend to, for I am getting very forward in age.’  I
    expressed a hope that she knew to whom to look for safety in the hour
    of death; she burst into tears at the name of the Saviour, and
    earnestly expressed her sole dependence upon him, saying, she found
    herself full of sins and infirmities, but that his redemption was
    sufficient.  She showed me a friend’s tract sent her several years
    ago by a lady, and said it had done her as much good as any thing
    (saving her bible) that she had in the house; also a little
    hand-bill, dropped in the road by some ladies, it was entitled, ‘Do
    you ever pray?’ and she said she had read it over and over, and it
    always reminded her of her duty.  I cannot precisely repeat her
    conversation, but it made me strongly feel the truth of that text:
    ‘Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shalt find it after many
    days.’  In the road I met a very infirm and afflicted old woman, the
    survivor of a husband and, I think, of six children, living on two
    shillings per week.  I asked her whether she had a bible.  ‘Ah, I
    paid in for one several years ago, and it is the greatest comfort I
    have had.’  I afterwards saw her in her own abode, a wretched hovel,
    with a chimney in the middle, where she lives with her old and most
    wretched mother-in-law.  She showed me, with pride, her precious
    bible, for which she had paid 7_s._ 10_d._, and said, ‘I spared the
    money when I wanted it for bread many a time, but I have never
    grudged it, it is all the comfort I have, and much more comfort than
    victuals to me.’  I believe, also, the effects of it may be seen in
    her forbearance and attention to her afflicted companion.  Having
    completed my round, I took my list to the collector, who gladly
    received it, and will enter with fresh spirit on her increased task.”

The benefit of carefully revisiting our districts, has been lately again
exemplified; when on our collectors going to nearly all the families of a
small circuit, about one hundred, most of which had already provided
themselves with bibles from our institution, they obtained sixty-four new
free subscribers, (many indeed of but one half-penny per month,) and
twenty-three for bibles and testaments.  This was after the interest of
the people had been excited by an address from the zealous agent of the
Norwich Auxiliary Society, delivered at Overstrand, in the church of the
long tried friend and unwavering advocate of our cause, the Rev. John
Cubitt.  One poor woman said, that after hearing the gentleman, she went
home, and poured out her soul to God for the heathen, and on offering her
half-penny, she said, “she gave it to the Lord, and wished she could make
it more.”  Her husband, and a daughter, have also subscribed a penny per
month, free.

When a district becomes fairly stocked with bibles, we cannot expect to
find so many anecdotes, furnished by the contrast between the condition
of destitute villages, and that of those supplied with the holy
scriptures, but we think we may say that within the last ten years,
owing, as we believe, to this society, combined with the extension of
education, and other causes, there is, amongst the people of this
neighbourhood, a perceptible advance in their acquaintance with the word
of God.  This is, we think, apparent, if only in the increased readiness
with which the people turn to the chapters and verses referred to by
ministers in their sermons, or on other occasions, when the scriptures
are read and explained to them.  We hope, and we cannot but believe, that
acquaintance with the letter of scripture must produce its corresponding
fruits.  Of these, however, it is not our province to speak rashly, but
we may observe that the contrast is very striking between the moral
state, and intellectual powers of the labouring classes of those
countries where the scriptures are in general use, and those where they
have no access to the written rule of life.  The operations of the Bible
Society, and the need that exists for its redoubled exertions are fully
set forth in the annual reports, and in the monthly extracts.  You may
not, however, be displeased to have a few facts bearing on these points,
which came under the notice of two of your own associates, during
excursions on the continent, in the summers of 1836 and 1838.  In the
little intercourse that they managed to get with the people, they had
reason to feel the contrast above alluded to; they felt the want of an
acknowledged rule of common reference in conversing with individuals of
those countries from which the bible is very much excluded.  If, for
instance, they gave a tract on the keeping of the sabbath, they found the
people had no sense of the sabbath, as a day of religious observance,
because they had no understanding of its being enforced as such in the
scriptures.  There was no bringing them “to the law and to the
testimony,” which they possessed not.  Very different is the effect of
conversing with the well-taught peasantry of Scotland.  You are aware
that the scriptures are circulated with difficulty in the Austrian
dominions.  In Prague, once the seat of biblical study, and whence issued
one of the very earliest printed translations of the bible, a bookseller
told your associates that the Bohemian bible was a prohibited book; he
might obtain a copy for a known customer, but it would be a smuggling
transaction.  Your associates were much struck by the wretched appearance
of the Jews in that city.  They have a separate quarter there, as well as
at Frankfort, and in both it was melancholy to drive through the narrow,
crowded streets, and to observe the squalid degraded countenances, and
the repugnance with which they seemed to regard the christian strangers.
It made them long to extend to them the boon which they could receive
with equal pleasure and profit—their own scriptures, in their own revered
language.  Your associates did not scruple to offer a few tracts in their
passage through Austria and Bohemia, and they noticed that those which
consisted solely of scriptural extracts were received with the most
pleasure: they often left groups reading them aloud, around the post
houses.  The same may be said of the French text books, selected by Mrs.
Fry, which were always received as a most acceptable present, and so were
the few copies of the New Testament, which they were able to carry.

A friend of theirs, Mrs. R. Fox, of Falmouth, had been in the South of
France, last Spring, and had mentioned to your associates, that she had
been much pleased with a young pair, Roman Catholics, who kept the small
hotel attached to the post-house at Orange.  She found they were just
married, and she left them a bible as a wedding present.  Your associates
asked the pleasing young landlady, if she had made any use of the bible.
“Yes,” she said, “her husband and herself read a chapter of it _every_
evening;” and the warmth with which they received the friends of the
donor, proved their true value for the gift.

In France, though there may be some opposition to the dispersion of the
scriptures, especially in the south, no danger can be incurred by the
attempt.  In the Sardinian dominions, the case is far different, and it
ought to teach us to value our own privileges, when we reflect on the
sufferings still endured by others, in their adherence to the testimony
of Jesus.  When your associates were at Nice last July, they heard of a
very respectable man, a small farmer, who had just been released from the
dungeons of the neighbouring Villa Franca, where he had been spending six
months in a vault sunk in the rocky cliff below the level of the sea, for
the crime of reading the bible to his wife, under his own tree on a
Sunday.  The gentleman who told them this fact, assured them also, that
though P–’s affairs had suffered from his imprisonment, he was not a man
to be daunted, nor was he likely to waver in his faith, or in his
practice of studying the scriptures.  Two other householders had also
been imprisoned that spring for the same cause.

Your associates could venture to give but few tracts and one or two
testaments in their passage through Piedmont and Savoy.  These however
were received with much interest.  The contrast was striking when they
reached Geneva, and found a bible in every set of rooms of their well
appointed hotel.  They believe this is usual in the Protestant cantons,
at least they found the same at other hotels, and Mr. Scholl the pasteur
of Lausanne told them, they had been placed there by the committee of the
Bible Society.  A great work of religion is carried on by means of this
society, and also of the Protestant Evangelical Societies of France and
Swisserland, which combine the objects of bible, missionary, and tract
societies.  For the former, they chiefly employ the colporteurs or
travelling salesmen, described by M. de Pressensé in his excellent
account of the operations of the Bible Society in France, (printed in the
appendix to the last report 1838,) and all that is there said of the
usefulness of this devoted class of men, was amply confirmed by the
information your associates gained respecting their labours.  These too
they perform for so small a remuneration, that it is clear they are only
prompted by conscientious motives. 100,000 copies of the scriptures are
now yearly distributed in France, and the directors of the societies
find, that it answers much better to sell them at a low price, than to
give them away.  The people are less willing to surrender their bibles to
be burnt by the priests, if they have paid a sum of money, however small,
for their purchase.  In some few instances, the Roman Catholic priests
themselves have been willing to promote the sale of the scriptures.
Amongst the countries which your associates most desired to see provided
with the scriptures, should any opportunity offer of aiding the supply,
were the valleys of the Alps, the people of which are confined by the
snows for months together, and express great desire for a store of
winter’s reading.  They met with a gentleman who had lately visited Felix
Neff’s parishes of the Hautes Alpes.  They asked if his work stood; he
assured them it did, and said that Neff’s people showed the effect of his
labours by the morality of their conduct, and especially by their
kindness towards each other, and freedom from petty quarrels, and
disputes about their strips of fertile land, which, from the general
barrenness of the soil, form a frequent source of litigation amongst
little proprietors in such situations.  They are however, excessively
poor; the best Sunday dinner they had to offer our friend was soup made
with suet, like tallow, and dried beans, with black bread two years old
chopped with a hatchet; the fare which killed poor Neff: he much wished
that a supply of bibles could be sent them, for they greatly needed them.
They had kept up the schools established by Neff, and in the long
winter’s evenings used to meet in the cow-houses (for warmth) to read by
lamp light, but they were very destitute of books of all kinds.  In no
way, perhaps, could a grant of bibles be better bestowed, than amongst
these well-disposed mountaineers, who may be in danger of losing the
christian standing they have acquired under the influence of a most
devoted minister, if they are not assisted to keep up their knowledge of
the word of God which he so successfully laboured to infuse.

We cannot omit to notice, that our association had pleasure in taking its
little share in the grant issued by the Parent Society, in thankful
commemoration of the event of the first of August, 1834, the abolition of
slavery throughout the British dominions.  Some of our subscribers
especially, took this occasion of proving that a liberal spirit is not to
be circumscribed by restricted means.  The behaviour of the negroes on
the day of their first emancipation, and on that of its completion by the
termination of the apprenticeship, Aug. 1st, 1838, has been such as to
afford an assurance that they could appreciate the gift.  A private
letter from Trinidad says, that the first of August last, “was spent in
praise, reading the scripture and prayer; all was order and peace.  Not a
drum or dance was heard, and the best of feeling pervaded every heart;”
and another from Jamaica, that “the day was there held as a sabbath.”

In retracing our course, many pleasing recollections present themselves;
we could name an aged friend of the cause, who had always given us her
cordial support, the last act of whose existence as to worldly affairs
was to put into her daughter’s hand her subscription for the bible and
other societies, in advance for the ensuing year, (1832,) with a warm
expression of the love for that gospel which must, she was convinced,
finally spread and prevail.  We could speak of another, a member of our
committee, who has carried the good wishes of us all to a distant island,
(Ceylon,) where she is placed, and we doubt not to useful purpose,
amongst scenes of heathen darkness, which she could effectively feel for,
when she little expected to behold them.  Others of our fellow-labourers
have been called to other spheres of active duty; but in one sense we may
truly say, that our band has never been disunited.  It will be seen from
the prefixed statement of our secretaries that we have distributed 2450
bibles and testaments, since our commencement, but we fear that the
obvious remark (on the inspection of our accounts) will be this, that our
efforts have not advanced in the ratio that might have been expected; we
are, however, convinced, that there needs but a vigorous push to carry
the present year’s gathering ahead of any former sum, and this
gratification we would call upon our friends, to secure for themselves
and for us.  We trust indeed that the work of renovation has been already
put in train by the labours of Mr. Wiseman, (the society’s agent, to whom
we have already alluded,) in forming new village associations, and in
exciting a fresh spirit of zeal amount us.  Our hearty desire is, that
every family in all our districts may be brought into direct connexion
with a society, which has already circulated nearly eleven million copies
of the holy scriptures.




QUERIES
FOR
The Use of the Ladies’ Bible Association
AT CROMER.


            “As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all men.”



ANSWERS REQUESTED ANNUALLY.


I.  Have we attended to the suggestions to collectors?

And to the directions of our printed papers?

How many “free contributors” have we now subscribing?

How many “subscribers for bibles and testaments” have we now on our list,
“not yet supplied?”

Can we mention the number of our _free_ contributors in each district,
“since the establishment of our association?”

And the number of our subscribers for bibles or testaments since the
establishment of our association, in November, 1827?

                                * * * * *

II.  How many families are there in our districts?

How many of these have we visited this year?

What number of persons can read in these families visited, and how many
are supplied with bibles?

Could we ascertain the number of persons above six years old, who cannot
read at all, in each of our districts?

                                * * * * *

III.  Are we alive to the feelings and interests of those with whom we
converse?

Have we taken pains to inform ourselves of the habits of our cottagers
with regard to reading the scriptures, and do we endeavour, in seasons of
sickness and calamity, to lead our neighbours to seek for comfort in the
scriptures?

Can we discover that any passages have impressed them, and can we mark
the application of such passages to their own circumstances?  In very
many cases it may be desirable, not only to recommend the constant
perusal of the scriptures, but to direct the attention of our subscribers
to the plainest parts, and to point out particular chapters, and even
books, of the sacred volume, for their study.

Do we enforce the necessity of private prayer, and of a regular
attendance on public worship?

                                * * * * *

IV.  Can we bring forward any instances of piety and love to our Lord and
Saviour, appearing in the character of the contributors?

Any proofs of habits of prayer for the grace of the Holy Spirit?

Any instances of truth, uprightness, and honesty?  Any acts of
self-government, self-denial, and general moral restraint?

Any victory obtained over prevailing temptations, such as
Sabbath-breaking, drinking, smuggling, &c., over evil tempers, and
propensities, in obedience to the commands of God?

                                * * * * *

V.  What indirect benefits can we ascribe to the operation of our
Association?

Are we as collectors and visitors, instrumental in promoting peace and
harmony, and in diffusing some religious feeling?

And do we encourage good order, neatness, and economy, amongst our poorer
neighbours?

                                * * * * *

VI.  Do we try to interest all our subscribers in the dispersion of the
scriptures in foreign parts?

And are we careful not to discourage even the poorest from enjoying
according to their very limited means, the privilege and blessing of
contributing to so good a cause?

                                * * * * *

VII.  Are we vigilant to uphold, and zealous to assist and to encourage
each other in the work before us?

Any information on the subjects of the above queries will be very
thankfully received, for the use of the committee, by

                                                                  S. M. B.
                                                      NORTH REPPS COTTAGE.

                                * * * * *

  _N.B.  This Report is printed independently of the funds of the Bible
                                Society_.

                                * * * * *

                                 Norwich:
                    JOSIAH FLETCHER, UPPER HAYMARKET.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT OF THE CROMER LADIES' BIBLE
ASSOCIATION, 1838***


******* This file should be named 58112-0.txt or 58112-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/8/1/1/58112


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

